backprop/README.md, before:

# A brief introduction to backpropagation 
> "Learning from one's mistakes"

I won't go into the brutal mathematical notations which are generally used, instead I'll try my best to explain it in terms of simple analogies and examples.  

I'll divide this into 2 sections:
1. The math behind backprop
2. How it works in practice 


## The math behind backprop

**Let's walk down a hill first**

The first step to walk down the hill, is to know which way is down, and that is exactly where the "gradient" comes in. 

**So which way is "down" ?**

It's the direction in which the rate of descent is the highest per step taken. 

<img src = "images/da_by_ds.jpg">

Where `a` is the altitude, and `s` is the number of steps taken. Notice how there's a `-` sign there as well, it's there because we're concerned with "descent" and not "ascent". 

**How does it apply to neural networks ?**

In simple terms, when a neural network is training, all that it's doing is walking through an "n-dimensional" mountain range (where "altitude" is the loss) and trying to find the lowest point possible (minimum loss). 

So the most efficient direction to take in general is to move in the direction of the steepest "descent". 

**Dummy example**

In order to walk down the hill, we'll need to know two things first:

* Which way is down ? 
* How big of a step do we take ? 

**Which way is down ?**

Imagine a small "single neuron" neural network. For the sake of simplicity, we'll not consider biases for now, you can imagine weights "W" as a set of all the parameters within it. 

Let us first make a prediction using this model and calculate the loss. 

<img src = "images/simple_nn_1.jpg" width = "50%">

The gradient of the loss with respect to the weight `W` defines how the loss would change with a small change in the weights. 

<img src = "images/grad.jpg">

 But wait, `grad` gives us the "direction" of the steepest "ascent". And the direction of "steepest descent" would be exactly in the opposite direction. Hence the direction of the steepest descent would be `-grad`.

**How big of a step do we take ?**

 So now we know which direction to go in order to decrease the loss, but the question is how big of a step do we take ? Do we wingsuit down the hill at full speeed or do we take a slow stroll. 

 This is where learning rate comes in, it defines how much do we alter the weight(s) at each iteration (step).

**Taking a step**

In a learning step, we update the weight(s) so as to minimize the loss. It's like taking one small step down the hill.

<img src = "images/step.jpg" width = "50%">

> reminder: `-grad` because we want "descent" and not "ascent". 

`Wn` is the new updated weight after a single step. 

## So what happens when we have multiple layers ? 

**Imagine this:**

* If a man is on foot, his actions directly affects the path he takes through the hills. It is difficult to move through rough terrain when on foot. 

* If a man is on a horse, his actions affects the horse (and not the path taken), which in turn affects the path taken for descent. This seems better for moving through rough terrain. 

The man on foot is a single layer model, and the man on the horse is a double layer model. 

<img src = "images/simple_nn_2.jpg" width = "50%">

The output of `Wa` affects the output of `Wb`, and the output of `Wb` affects the `loss`. 

Now in order to update the weights here, we'll need to calculate two gradients:
1. `d(loss)/d(Wa)`
2. `d(loss)/d(Wb)`

But the `loss` is not directly affected by `Wa`, so how do we find `d(loss)/d(Wa)` ? 

**This is exactly where the chain rule comes in:**

If `z` depends on `y` and `y` depends on `x`, then:

<img src = "images/chain_rule.jpg">

In our case,
* `z` is `loss`
* `x` is `Wa`
* `y` is `Wb`

So we update the weights as follows:

<img src = "images/step_3.jpg" width = "70%"> 

> Where `Wan` and `Wbn` are the updated weights after a single step. 

## How it works in practice

<img src = "images/backprop_main.jpg" width = "100%" > 

I'll break down the diagram shown above bit by bit: 

* **Model**

    A simple 3 layer neural network without any activation functions. The core idea remains the same, with or without activation layers. 

* **Layer wise operations**

    There are 3 layers in the model, hence 3 sets of operations are performed in each forward pass. 

    For a single layer, with weights `W` and biases `B`, the output of the layer can be defined as Z like: 

    ```
    Z = W(x) + B
    ```

    Where `X` is the input.  

* **Local gradients**

    These are the gradients which define how one value within the model affects the other values within it's immediate proximity (loosely speaking).  

    * For a given layer `Z = W(x) + B`, we can calculate the local gradients as:

    1. The change in Z for a small change in W can be given by `dZ/dW`. By applying simple calculus, we get: 

        ```
        dZ/dW = x
        ```
    2. Similarly, we can find `dZ/dB`

        ```
        dZ/dB = 1
        ```
    3. For `Z` and `C` in the diagram above, we know that  `W(Z) + B = C`

        ```
        dC/dZ = W
        ```
        Where `W` is the weights of layer 2 in the image given above.

Commit message:

backprop: add backward pass section

backprop/README.md, after:

# A brief introduction to backpropagation 
> "Learning from one's mistakes"

I won't go into the brutal mathematical notations which are generally used, instead I'll try my best to explain it in terms of simple analogies and examples.  

I'll divide this into 2 sections:
1. The math behind backprop
2. How it works in practice 


## The math behind backprop

**Let's walk down a hill first**

The first step to walk down the hill, is to know which way is down, and that is exactly where the "gradient" comes in. 

**So which way is "down" ?**

It's the direction in which the rate of descent is the highest per step taken. 

<img src = "images/da_by_ds.jpg">

Where `a` is the altitude, and `s` is the number of steps taken. Notice how there's a `-` sign there as well, it's there because we're concerned with "descent" and not "ascent". 

**How does it apply to neural networks ?**

In simple terms, when a neural network is training, all that it's doing is walking through an "n-dimensional" mountain range (where "altitude" is the loss) and trying to find the lowest point possible (minimum loss). 

So the most efficient direction to take in general is to move in the direction of the steepest "descent". 

**Dummy example**

In order to walk down the hill, we'll need to know two things first:

* Which way is down ? 
* How big of a step do we take ? 

**Which way is down ?**

Imagine a small "single neuron" neural network. For the sake of simplicity, we'll not consider biases for now, you can imagine weights "W" as a set of all the parameters within it. 

Let us first make a prediction using this model and calculate the loss. 

<img src = "images/simple_nn_1.jpg" width = "50%">

The gradient of the loss with respect to the weight `W` defines how the loss would change with a small change in the weights. 

<img src = "images/grad.jpg">

 But wait, `grad` gives us the "direction" of the steepest "ascent". And the direction of "steepest descent" would be exactly in the opposite direction. Hence the direction of the steepest descent would be `-grad`.

**How big of a step do we take ?**

 So now we know which direction to go in order to decrease the loss, but the question is how big of a step do we take ? Do we wingsuit down the hill at full speeed or do we take a slow stroll. 

 This is where learning rate comes in, it defines how much do we alter the weight(s) at each iteration (step).

**Taking a step**

In a learning step, we update the weight(s) so as to minimize the loss. It's like taking one small step down the hill.

<img src = "images/step.jpg" width = "50%">

> reminder: `-grad` because we want "descent" and not "ascent". 

`Wn` is the new updated weight after a single step. 

## So what happens when we have multiple layers ? 

**Imagine this:**

* If a man is on foot, his actions directly affects the path he takes through the hills. It is difficult to move through rough terrain when on foot. 

* If a man is on a horse, his actions affects the horse (and not the path taken), which in turn affects the path taken for descent. This seems better for moving through rough terrain. 

The man on foot is a single layer model, and the man on the horse is a double layer model. 

<img src = "images/simple_nn_2.jpg" width = "50%">

The output of `Wa` affects the output of `Wb`, and the output of `Wb` affects the `loss`. 

Now in order to update the weights here, we'll need to calculate two gradients:
1. `d(loss)/d(Wa)`
2. `d(loss)/d(Wb)`

But the `loss` is not directly affected by `Wa`, so how do we find `d(loss)/d(Wa)` ? 

**This is exactly where the chain rule comes in:**

If `z` depends on `y` and `y` depends on `x`, then:

<img src = "images/chain_rule.jpg">

In our case,
* `z` is `loss`
* `x` is `Wa`
* `y` is `Wb`

So we update the weights as follows:

<img src = "images/step_3.jpg" width = "70%"> 

> Where `Wan` and `Wbn` are the updated weights after a single step. 

## How it works in practice

<img src = "images/backprop_main.jpg" width = "100%" > 

I'll break down the diagram shown above bit by bit: 

* **Model**

    A simple 3 layer neural network without any activation functions. The core idea remains the same, with or without activation layers. 

* **Layer wise operations**

    There are 3 layers in the model, hence 3 sets of operations are performed in each forward pass. 

    For a single layer, with weights `W` and biases `B`, the output of the layer can be defined as Z like: 

    ```
    Z = W(x) + B
    ```

    Where `X` is the input.  

* **Local gradients**

    These are the gradients which define how one value within the model affects the other values within it's immediate proximity (loosely speaking).  

    * For a given layer `Z = W(x) + B`, we can calculate the local gradients as:

        1. The change in Z for a small change in W can be given by `dZ/dW`. By applying simple calculus, we get: 

            ```
            dZ/dW = x
            ```
        2. Similarly, we can find `dZ/dB`

            ```
            dZ/dB = 1
            ```
    * For `Z` and `C` in the diagram above, we know that  `W(Z) + B = C`

        ```
        dC/dZ = W
        ```
        Where `W` is the weights of layer 2 in the image given above.

* **Backward pass**

    The objective here is to find out how every weight and bias within the neural network affects the loss, i.e finding the gradient of the loss w.r.t each individual bias and weight. The chain rule has been used extensively here. 

    I'll start with a simple idea:

    * If `A` can influence `B` and `B` can influence `C`, then `A` can influence `C` through `B`. 

    * Then if we know 
        * the rate at which `B` changes for a small change in `A` (`dB/dA`) 
        * the rate at which `C` changes for a small change in `B` (`dC/dB`)

    * Then we can also find the rate at which `C` changes for a small change in `A` by "chaining" the derivatives i.e `dC/dA = dC/dB * dB/dA`
